### Pre-processing of ATAC-seq alignments

We have sequenced 75 samples that correspond to the three most recently segmented somites in embryos at several different stages of development. 

The resulting libraries were sequenced in an Illumina 4000 to produce paired-end 150bp fragments. Samples were multiplexed and sequenced across 11 lanes.

#### Alignment to the mouse reference genome

Data from each lane were mapped to the most recent mouse reference genome (mm10) using `bwa mem` with default parameters. 

We use `samtools` to merge all BAM files from the same sample.

```{bash}
sh 01.1_mergeBAMs.sh
```

And we rename the resulting BAM files with sample information.

```{bash}
sh 01.2_renameBAMs.sh
```

----

One sample -e33_SII-2-, was sequenced to disproportionally high depth. Its BAM file is 83Gb when the median BAM file size is 5Gb. Since it is going to be impossible to work with such a large amount of data, we use `samtools` to downsample it to 15%, which brings it down to a size much closer to the second largest library.

```{bash}
mv /user01/group_folders/Personal/Ximena/SOMITES/somitogenesis2020/ATAC-seq/data/BWA/e33_SII-2.bam /user01/group_folders/Personal/Ximena/SOMITES/somitogenesis2020/ATAC-seq/data/BWA/e33_SII-2.fullDepth.bam

samtools view -bh -s 100.15 /user01/group_folders/Personal/Ximena/SOMITES/somitogenesis2020/ATAC-seq/data/BWA/e33_SII-2.fullDepth.bam > /user01/group_folders/Personal/Ximena/SOMITES/somitogenesis2020/ATAC-seq/data/BWA/e33_SII-2.bam

rm /user01/group_folders/Personal/Ximena/SOMITES/somitogenesis2020/ATAC-seq/data/BWA/e33_SII-2.fullDepth.bam
```

#### Remove duplicates and bad-quality alignments

There are several pre-processing steps required to clean-up the data before any analyses can be performed.

1. Mark and remove duplicates with `picard` tools.

2. Remove any bad quality alignments using `samtools`. This includes low-quality (lower than 30) and supplementary alignments.

3. Discard any alignments on the mitochondrial genome, Y chromosome or scaffolds and contigs.

4. Use `samtools flagstat` to estimate the final library size.

To perform all these steps, we use a `perl` script to generate all the needed commands.

```{bash}
perl 01.3_clean_BAMs.pl -file 01.3_params.txt
```

This produces the `01.3_clean_BAMs.sh` file. Run it.

```{bash}
sh 01.3_clean_BAMs.sh
```

#### Obtain general statistics

Finally, we want to know the initial library sizes of all samples, and how many fragments remain after each processing step.

To get the library sizes from the FASTQ files, we exploit the information on the FASTQC reports that were initially run for all samples.

The perl script `01.4_countTotalReads_fromFASTQC.pl` collects this information. We run it for each sample.

```{bash}
sh 01.4_countTotalReads_fromFASTQC.sh
```

To get the number of fragments that are actually aligned we can use the reports from `picard MarkDuplicates`. And we can also retain the number of fragments that were marked as duplicates. We can use `grep` for this. 

```{bash}
sh 01.5_countMappedReads.sh
```

Finally, we also use `grep` to check the final library size from the flagstat report.

```{bash}
sh 01.6_countGoodQualReads.sh
```

All these statistics are added to the metadata file, for future reference.

#### Results

At this point we have produced BAM files containing only unique good quality alignments of fragments mapping to the autosomes and the X chromosome. These are the starting point for downstream analyses.



