### TSS enrichment 

Another important feature to assess the quality of ATAC-seq libraries is the enrichment of reads around the TSS of expressed genes. However, we first need to infer the insertion site of the transposase.

#### ATAC-seq read shifting to infer Tn5 insertion site

Tn5 cuts the DNA and inserts the adapters with a 9bp offset between the two strands. Traditionally, the reads are shifted 4 or 5 nucleotides (depending on whether the read maps to the `+` or `-` strand) to reflect the midpoint where the Tn5 was bound.

The easiest way of achieving this is by converting the BAM files into text files and altering the read alignment coordinates directly. 

1. Use `bedtools` to convert BAM files into BEDPE files. 

```{bash}
sh 03.1_BAMtoBEDPE.sh
```

2. We then use a custom `perl` script to shift the fragments' coordinates. In the conversion to BEDPE, we ask `bedtools` to always report mate1 first. Depending on mate1's strand we perform the shifting as follows:

- If mate1 maps to the `+` strand, fragment start+4 and fragment end-5.

- If mate1 maps to the `-` strand, fragment start+5 and fragment end-4.

These shifted coordinates represent the inferred insertion sited of Tn5. We report these as a BED file.

```{bash}
perl 03.2_shiftAlns_fromBEDPE.pl -dir /user01/group_folders/Personal/Ximena/SOMITES/somitogenesis2020/ATAC-seq/data/BWA/
```

#### TSS insertion counts

Finally, we count the number of insertions around the TSS of expressed genes. 

For this, we obtain the earliest annotated TSS for any gene moderately to highly expressed in the RNA-seq data, and extract a 2kb interval centered at the TSS (see `ATAC-seq/scripts/dataAnalysis/02_qualityControl.md` for details).

Using `bedtools coverage` we compute the number of insertions at each basepair in these intervals.

```{bash}
sh 03.3_countInsertions_TSS.sh
```
