### Processing of RNA-seq data

We have sequenced 77 samples that correspond to the three most recently segmented somites from embryos at several stages of development. 

The resulting libraries were sequenced in an Illumina 4000 to produce paired-end 150bp fragments. Samples were multiplexed and sequenced across 5 lanes.

### Merging all lanes

First, we merge all reads for each sample, from the 5 lanes.

```{bash}
sh 01.1_mergeFASTQs.sh
```

### Mapping to the reference genome

Next, each sample is mapped to the reference mouse `mm10` genome.

We use Ensembl annotation version 96 to quantify expression.

```{bash}
wget ftp://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/release-96/gtf/mus_musculus/Mus_musculus.GRCm38.96.gtf.gz
gunzip Mus_musculus.GRCm38.96.gtf.gz 
```

We parse the `GTF` file to retain relevant information to annotate each gene.

```{bash}
perl -ne 'if($_ =~ /^#/){ next; } @data=split(/\t/,$_); if($data[2] ne "gene"){ next; } $data[8] =~ /gene_id \"(.+)\"\; gene_version \".+\"\; gene_name \"(.+)\"\; gene_source \".+\"\; gene_biotype \"(.+)\"\;/; print "$1\t$2\t$data[0]\t$data[3]\t$data[4]\t$data[6]\t$3\n"; ' Mus_musculus.GRCm38.96.gtf > /user01/group_folders/Personal/Ximena/somitogenesis2020/RNA-seq/data/Mus_musculus.GRCm38.96.ann
```

We use STAR for the alignment and quantification in one step.

```{bash}
sh 01.2_align.sh
```

This produces a BAM file with the aligned reads for each sample, plus a `ReadsPerGene.out.tab` file containing the fragment counts for each gene annotated in the `GTF` file.

Additionally, we asked STAR to output the alignments in `bedgraph` format also, in case we want to plot coverage tracks at some point.

We use a perl script to parse the log files from STAR to get the mapping statistics.

```{bash}
perl 01.3_mappingStats.pl -dir /user01/group_folders/Personal/Ximena/somitogenesis2020/RNA-seq/data/STAR/ > /user01/group_folders/Personal/Ximena/somitogenesis2020/RNA-seq/data/mappingStatistics.tsv
```

Finally, we use an R script (`01.4_countMatrix.R`) to collate the read counts for all samples and generate the count matrix to start the analysis. This script generates two files: `RNA-seq/data/geneCounts.RAW.tsv` contains the raw count gene matrix; and `RNA-seq/data/countingStatistics.tsv`, which contains the counting statistics (number of uniquely mapped, multi-mapped and unmapped fragments).

